image/avs avs
image/bie bie
image/bmp bm bmp
image/cis-cod cod
image/cmu-raster ras rast
image/cmyk cmyk
image/dcx
image/eps
image/fax
image/fax-g3 g3
image/fif fif
image/fits fits
image/florian flo turbot
image/g3fax g3
image/gif gif
image/gray
image/ief ief iefs
image/jpeg jfif jfif-tbnl jpe jpeg jpg
image/jutvision jut
image/miff
image/mono
image/mtv
image/naplps nap naplps
image/pcd
image/pcx pcx
image/pdf
image/pict pic pict
image/pjpeg jfif jpe jpeg jpg
image/png png x-png
image/ps ps
image/rad
image/rgba
image/rla
image/rle rle
image/sgi sgi
image/sun-raster sun
image/svg svg
image/svg+xml svg
image/targa tga
image/tga tga
image/tiff tif tiff
image/uyvy
image/vasa mcf
image/vid
image/viff
image/vnd.dwg dwg dxf svf
image/vnd.fpx fpx
image/vnd.net-fpx fpx
image/vnd.rn-realflash rf
image/vnd.rn-realpix rp
image/vnd.wap.wbmp wbmp
image/vnd.xiff xif
image/xbm xbm
image/x-bzeps eps.bz2
image/x-cmu-raster ras
image/x-cmx cmx
image/x-dwg dwg dxf svf
image/x-eps eps epsi epsf
image/x-gzeps eps.gz
image/x-icon ico
image/x-jg art
image/x-jng jng
image/x-jps jps
image/x-ms-bmp bmp
image/x-niff nif niff
image/x-pcx pcx
image/x-pict pct
image/xpm xpm
image/x-png png
image/x-portable-anymap pnm
image/x-portable-bitmap pbm
image/x-portable-graymap pgm
image/x-portable-greymap pgm
image/x-portable-pixmap ppm
image/x-quicktime qif qti qtif
image/x-rgb rgb
image/x-tiff tif tiff
image/x-windows-bmp bmp
image/x-xbitmap xbm
image/x-xbm xbm
image/x-xpixmap pm xpm
image/x-xpm xpm
image/x-xwd xwd
image/x-xwindowdump xwd
image/yuv
